.SH LANGUAGE SYNTAX
Vitte source files conventionally use the
.B .vit
file extension.

The language uses explicit module declarations, grouped imports, immutable and mutable bindings, typed procedures, algebraic data types, ownership-aware references, pattern matching, and semicolon-terminated statements.

.SH LEXICAL STRUCTURE

.SS Identifiers
Identifiers begin with an ASCII letter or underscore and may contain letters, digits, and underscores.

.PP
Examples:

.nf
compiler
type_checker
_value
target64
.fi

.SS Keywords
The principal Vitte keywords include:

.nf
space
use
share
all
proc
let
set
form
pick
trait
impl
type
const
static
extern
unsafe
where
when
match
if
else
loop
while
for
in
break
continue
give
defer
move
ref
mut
as
is
not
and
or
true
false
none
.fi

.SS Comments
Single-line comments begin with
.BR // .

.nf
// This is a comment.
.fi

Documentation comments begin with
.BR /// .

.nf
/// Returns the number of elements.
proc length() -> u64 {
give 0;
}
.fi

Block comments use
.B /*
and
.BR */ .

.nf
/*
Multi-line comment.
*/
.fi

Nested block comments may be supported by the frontend when enabled by the active language profile.

.SS Whitespace
Spaces, tabs, and line breaks separate tokens but are otherwise insignificant except inside literals.

.SS Statement termination
Most declarations and statements are terminated by a semicolon.

.nf
let count: int = 10;
set index: int = 0;
give count;
.fi

Blocks, procedure declarations, forms, picks, implementations, and namespaces are not followed by a semicolon unless required by their enclosing grammar.

.SH MODULES AND NAMESPACES

.SS Space declaration
A source file may declare its namespace using
.BR space .

.nf
space vitte.compiler.analysis;
.fi

Nested namespace paths are separated with dots.

.nf
space vitte.compiler.analysis.borrowck;
.fi

.SS Imports
Modules are imported using
.BR use .

.nf
use core.string.String;
use core.option.Option;
.fi

Grouped imports use braces.

.nf
use core.collections.{Vector, HashMap, HashSet};
use vitte.compiler.ast.{Node, Expr, Stmt};
.fi

Aliases may be declared using
.BR as .

.nf
use core.collections.HashMap as Map;
.fi

A complete module may be imported when explicitly allowed.

.nf
use core.memory.*;
.fi

Explicit imports are preferred for deterministic resolution.

.SS Visibility
Declarations are private to their module by default.

The
.B share
keyword exposes declarations.

.nf
share proc compile(path: string) -> bool {
give true;
}
.fi

A module entry file may export all public declarations using:

.nf
share all;
.fi

.SH BUILT-IN TYPES

.SS Boolean type
The Boolean type is
.BR bool .

.nf
let enabled: bool = true;
let disabled: bool = false;
.fi

.SS Signed integer types
Signed integer types include:

.nf
i8
i16
i32
i64
i128
int
isize
.fi

The
.B int
type is the canonical general-purpose signed integer type.

.SS Unsigned integer types
Unsigned integer types include:

.nf
u8
u16
u32
u64
u128
usize
.fi

.SS Floating-point types
Floating-point types include:

.nf
f16
f32
f64
f128
.fi

Target support for extended floating-point formats may vary.

.SS Character and string types
The character type is
.BR char .

The owned string type is
.BR string .

.nf
let letter: char = ‘V’;
let name: string = “Vitte”;
.fi

String slices and borrowed text views may be represented using library types such as
.B str
or explicit references.

.SS Unit type
The unit type represents the absence of a meaningful value.

.nf
proc log_message(message: string) -> unit {
print(message);
}
.fi

Where permitted, the return type may be omitted for procedures returning unit.

.SS Never type
The never type represents a computation that does not return normally.

.nf
proc fatal(message: string) -> never {
panic(message);
}
.fi

.SS Arrays
An array or homogeneous sequence type is written using brackets.

.nf
let values: [int] = [1, 2, 3, 4];
let names: [string] = [“lexer”, “parser”, “backend”];
.fi

Fixed-size arrays may use a size expression.

.nf
let bytes: [u8; 16];
.fi

.SS Tuples
Tuples group values of potentially different types.

.nf
let entry: (string, int, bool) = (“main”, 0, true);
.fi

A tuple field is accessed by position.

.nf
let name: string = entry.0;
.fi

.SS Function types
Procedure values may use explicit parameter and return types.

.nf
type Predicate = proc(int) -> bool;
.fi

.SH LITERALS

.SS Integer literals
Integer literals may be decimal, binary, octal, or hexadecimal.

.nf
let decimal: int = 42;
let binary: u8 = 0b101010;
let octal: u16 = 0o52;
let hexadecimal: u32 = 0x2A;
.fi

Digit separators may be written with underscores.

.nf
let million: int = 1_000_000;
.fi

.SS Floating-point literals

.nf
let ratio: f64 = 3.141592;
let scientific: f64 = 1.5e10;
.fi

.SS Character literals

.nf
let ascii: char = ‘A’;
let newline: char = ‘\en’;
let unicode: char = ‘\eu{03BB}’;
.fi

.SS String literals

.nf
let simple: string = “Vitte”;
let escaped: string = “line 1\enline 2”;
.fi

Raw strings may be used where supported.

.nf
let path: string = r”C:\eProgram Files\eVitte”;
.fi

.SS Boolean literals

.nf
true
false
.fi

.SS Null and empty values
Optional values use the canonical empty variant provided by the relevant option type.

.nf
let result: Option = none;
.fi

Raw null pointers are only valid in unsafe or foreign-function contexts.

.SH VARIABLES AND BINDINGS

.SS Immutable bindings
Immutable bindings are declared with
.BR let .

.nf
let count: int = 10;
let name: string = “compiler”;
.fi

The type may be inferred when the initializer provides enough information.

.nf
let count = 10;
.fi

.SS Mutable bindings
Mutable bindings are declared with
.BR set .

.nf
set index: int = 0;
index = index + 1;
.fi

.SS Destructuring
Tuple and structured values may be destructured.

.nf
let (name, value) = (“answer”, 42);
.fi

Pattern-based destructuring may also be used with forms and picks.

.SS Constants
Compile-time constants are declared with
.BR const .

.nf
const PAGE_SIZE: usize = 4096;
const VERSION: string = “0.1.0”;
.fi

.SS Static storage
Static values are declared with
.BR static .

.nf
static BUILD_COUNT: u64 = 0;
.fi

Mutable static storage may require an unsafe context.

.SH OPERATORS

.SS Arithmetic operators

.nf
+

/
%
.fi

.SS Assignment operators

.nf

+=
-=
*=
/=
%=
.fi

Assignment operators may only be used with mutable bindings or writable locations.

.SS Comparison operators

.nf

!=
<
<=

=
.fi

.SS Logical operators
Vitte supports keyword logical operators.

.nf
and
or
not
.fi

Example:

.nf
if ready and not failed {
run();
}
.fi

Symbolic logical operators may be accepted only if enabled by the selected grammar profile.

.SS Bitwise operators

.nf
&
|
^
~
<<

.fi

.SS Range operators
Ranges may be written using inclusive or exclusive bounds.

.nf
0..10
0..=10
.fi

.SS Type operators
The
.B as
operator performs an explicit conversion.

.nf
let value: i64 = small as i64;
.fi

The
.B is
operator tests a runtime or variant property when supported.

.nf
if value is Token.Identifier {
process(value);
}
.fi

.SH EXPRESSIONS

.SS Block expressions
A block contains statements and may yield a final expression or explicit
.B give
value depending on context.

.nf
let result: int = {
let left: int = 20;
let right: int = 22;
left + right
};
.fi

.SS Conditional expressions

.nf
if condition {
execute();
} else {
recover();
}
.fi

Conditions must have type
.BR bool .

Conditional expressions may produce values.

.nf
let mode: string = if debug {
“debug”
} else {
“release”
};
.fi

.SS Match expressions
The
.B match
expression performs exhaustive pattern matching.

.nf
match token {
Token.Identifier(name) => handle_identifier(name),
Token.Number(value) => handle_number(value),
Token.End => finish(),
}
.fi

A wildcard pattern is written with an underscore.

.nf
match value {
0 => zero(),
1 => one(),
_ => other(),
}
.fi

Guards may be added using
.BR when .

.nf
match value {
number when number < 0 => negative(number),
number => positive(number),
}
.fi

.SS Procedure calls

.nf
compile(“main.vit”);
.fi

Named arguments may be supported for explicitly named parameters.

.nf
build(path: “main.vit”, optimize: true);
.fi

.SS Field access

.nf
let file_name: string = file.name;
.fi

.SS Method calls

.nf
let length: usize = values.len();
.fi

Canonical library code may also use free functions such as:

.nf
let length: usize = len(values);
.fi

.SS Index expressions

.nf
let first: int = values[0];
.fi

Index operations must be bounds checked unless an unsafe operation is explicitly requested.

.SS Array append
Immutable array extension follows the canonical Vitte update style.

.nf
let values: [int] = [1, 2];
let extended: [int] = values + [3];
.fi

For mutable bindings:

.nf
set values: [int] = [1, 2];
values = values + [3];
.fi

.SH CONTROL FLOW

.SS If statement

.nf
if value > 0 {
positive();
} else if value < 0 {
negative();
} else {
zero();
}
.fi

.SS While loop

.nf
set index: usize = 0;

while index < len(values) {
process(values[index]);
index = index + 1;
}
.fi

.SS For loop

.nf
for value in values {
process(value);
}
.fi

Ranges may be iterated directly.

.nf
for index in 0..10 {
print(index);
}
.fi

.SS Infinite loop

.nf
loop {
tick();
}
.fi

.SS Break
The
.B break
statement terminates the nearest loop.

.nf
loop {
if complete {
break;
}
}
.fi

A loop may optionally yield a value.

.nf
let result: int = loop {
if ready {
break 42;
}
};
.fi

.SS Continue
The
.B continue
statement begins the next loop iteration.

.nf
for value in values {
if value == 0 {
continue;
}

process(value);

}
.fi

.SS Return
Procedures return values using
.BR give .

.nf
proc add(left: int, right: int) -> int {
give left + right;
}
.fi

A unit-returning procedure may use:

.nf
give;
.fi

.SS Deferred execution
The
.B defer
statement schedules cleanup when the current scope exits.

.nf
let file = open(“data.txt”);
defer close(file);

process(file);
.fi

.SH PROCEDURES

.SS Procedure declaration
Procedures are declared using
.BR proc .

.nf
proc add(left: int, right: int) -> int {
give left + right;
}
.fi

.SS Public procedures

.nf
share proc compile(path: string) -> Result<Artifact, Error> {
give compile_file(path);
}
.fi

.SS Generic procedures

.nf
proc identity(value: T) -> T {
give value;
}
.fi

.SS Generic constraints
Constraints may be introduced using
.BR where .

.nf
proc maximum(left: T, right: T) -> T
where T: Compare {
if left > right {
give left;
}

give right;

}
.fi

.SS Variadic procedures
Variadic procedures are generally restricted to foreign-function interfaces or explicitly supported runtime facilities.

.SS Procedure overloading
Procedure overloading must remain deterministic and may be restricted by the active language specification.

.SH FORMS

.SS Form declaration
A
.B form
declares a structured product type.

.nf
form Position {
x: f64,
y: f64,
}
.fi

Fields use the syntax:

.nf
name: type
.fi

.SS Public forms

.nf
share form Diagnostic {
code: string,
message: string,
severity: Severity,
}
.fi

.SS Generic forms

.nf
form Pair<A, B> {
first: A,
second: B,
}
.fi

.SS Form construction

.nf
let position: Position = Position {
x: 10.0,
y: 20.0,
};
.fi

.SS Field update
Vitte favors immutable updates.

.nf
proc with_x(position: Position, x: f64) -> Position {
give Position {
x: x,
y: position.y,
};
}
.fi

Direct mutable field assignment requires a mutable value.

.nf
set position: Position = Position {
x: 0.0,
y: 0.0,
};

position.x = 12.0;
.fi

.SH PICKS

.SS Pick declaration
A
.B pick
declares a tagged union or algebraic data type.

.nf
pick Option {
Some(T),
None,
}
.fi

Variants are comma-separated.

.nf
pick Token {
Identifier(string),
Integer(int),
String(string),
LeftParen,
RightParen,
End,
}
.fi

.SS Structured variants

.nf
pick Expression {
Literal(Literal),
Binary {
left: ExprId,
operator: BinaryOperator,
right: ExprId,
},
Call {
callee: ExprId,
arguments: [ExprId],
},
}
.fi

.SS Variant construction

.nf
let token: Token = Token.Identifier(“main”);
let empty: Option = Option.None;
.fi

.SS Variant matching

.nf
match option {
Option.Some(value) => use_value(value),
Option.None => use_default(),
}
.fi

.SH TYPE ALIASES
Type aliases are declared with
.BR type .

.nf
type NodeId = u64;
type ByteBuffer = [u8];
type Callback = proc(Event) -> bool;
.fi

Aliases do not necessarily create distinct nominal types.

.SH TRAITS AND IMPLEMENTATIONS

.SS Trait declaration
Traits define shared behavior.

.nf
trait Display {
proc display(self: ref Self) -> string;
}
.fi

.SS Trait with associated types

.nf
trait Iterator {
type Item;

proc next(self: mut ref Self) -> Option<Self.Item>;

}
.fi

.SS Implementation block
Implementations use
.BR impl .

.nf
impl Display for Position {
proc display(self: ref Position) -> string {
give format(”({}, {})”, self.x, self.y);
}
}
.fi

.SS Inherent implementation

.nf
impl Position {
proc new(x: f64, y: f64) -> Position {
give Position {
x: x,
y: y,
};
}
}
.fi

.SS Generic implementation

.nf
impl Container {
proc len(self: ref Container) -> usize {
give len(self.values);
}
}
.fi

.SH REFERENCES AND OWNERSHIP

.SS Immutable references
An immutable reference is written using
.BR ref .

.nf
proc inspect(value: ref string) -> usize {
give len(value);
}
.fi

.SS Mutable references
A mutable reference combines
.B mut
and
.BR ref .

.nf
proc increment(value: mut ref int) {
value = value + 1;
}
.fi

.SS Move semantics
Ownership may be transferred explicitly using
.BR move .

.nf
let destination = move source;
.fi

After a move, the original binding may no longer be used unless its type implements copy semantics.

.SS Borrowing
Borrowing creates a temporary reference without transferring ownership.

.nf
let size: usize = inspect(ref name);
.fi

Mutable borrowing requires an exclusive mutable binding.

.nf
set count: int = 0;
increment(mut ref count);
.fi

.SS Lifetimes
Lifetime parameters may be written explicitly where inference is insufficient.

.nf
proc first<’a>(values: ref ’a [int]) -> ref ’a int {
give ref values[0];
}
.fi

Exact lifetime syntax depends on the active borrow-checker grammar.

.SH ERROR HANDLING

.SS Result values
Recoverable errors use result-like pick types.

.nf
pick Result<T, E> {
Ok(T),
Error(E),
}
.fi

.SS Explicit propagation
Errors may be propagated using pattern matching.

.nf
proc load(path: string) -> Result<string, IoError> {
let result = read_file(path);

match result {
    Result.Ok(content) => give Result.Ok(content),
    Result.Error(error) => give Result.Error(error),
}

}
.fi

A propagation operator may be provided by the active language version.

.nf
let content = read_file(path)?;
.fi

.SS Panic
Unrecoverable failures may invoke the runtime panic facility.

.nf
panic(“internal compiler invariant violated”);
.fi

Assertions include:

.nf
assert(condition);
assert_eq(left, right);
assert_ne(left, right);
.fi

.SH OPTIONAL VALUES
Optional values are represented with
.BR Option .

.nf
proc find(name: string) -> Option {
if exists(name) {
give Option.Some(resolve(name));
}

give Option.None;

}
.fi

.SH ITERATORS

.SS Iterator protocol
Iterable collections expose an iterator consumed by
.BR for .

.nf
for item in collection {
process(item);
}
.fi

A canonical iterator trait may define a
.B next
procedure returning an optional value.

.nf
trait Iterator {
type Item;

proc next(self: mut ref Self) -> Option<Self.Item>;

}
.fi

.SS Common iterator operations
Standard iterator operations may include:

.nf
map
filter
fold
reduce
find
any
all
enumerate
zip
take
skip
collect
.fi

.SH ATTRIBUTES
Attributes attach metadata to declarations.

.nf
@test
proc parses_integer() {
assert_eq(parse(“42”), 42);
}
.fi

Attributes with parameters use parentheses.

.nf
@inline(always)
proc fast_path() {
}
.fi

Common compiler attributes may include:

.nf
@test
@bench
@inline
@no_inline
@deprecated
@must_use
@cold
@export
@link
@repr
@cfg
@derive
.fi

Exact support depends on the compiler version and target.

.SH CONDITIONAL COMPILATION
Conditional compilation may use the
.B cfg
attribute.

.nf
@cfg(target_os = “linux”)
proc platform_name() -> string {
give “linux”;
}
.fi

Boolean conditions may be combined.

.nf
@cfg(all(target_arch = “x86_64”, feature = “native”))
.fi

.SH FOREIGN FUNCTION INTERFACE

.SS External declarations
Foreign procedures are declared with
.BR extern .

.nf
extern “C” {
proc malloc(size: usize) -> ptr;
proc free(memory: ptr);
}
.fi

.SS Exported procedures
A Vitte procedure may be exported with an explicit ABI.

.nf
@export
extern “C” proc vitte_entry(argc: int, argv: ptr<ptr>) -> int {
give 0;
}
.fi

.SS Raw pointers
Raw pointers are intended for runtime, operating-system, embedded, and foreign-interface code.

.nf
ptr
const_ptr
.fi

Raw pointer dereferencing requires an unsafe context.

.SH UNSAFE CODE
Operations that bypass normal memory-safety guarantees must appear in an
.B unsafe
block or procedure.

.nf
unsafe {
let value: u8 = pointer.read();
}
.fi

An unsafe procedure is declared as:

.nf
unsafe proc read_raw(address: usize) -> u8 {
give load_u8(address);
}
.fi

Unsafe code remains subject to syntax, type, and ABI validation.

.SH GENERICS

.SS Generic types

.nf
form Box {
value: T,
}
.fi

.SS Multiple generic parameters

.nf
form MapEntry<K, V> {
key: K,
value: V,
}
.fi

.SS Generic defaults

.nf
form Buffer<T = u8> {
values: [T],
}
.fi

.SS Generic constraints

.nf
proc sort(values: [T]) -> [T]
where T: Compare + Clone {
give sort_impl(values);
}
.fi

.SH PATTERNS
Patterns are used in
.BR let ,
.BR match ,
and loop bindings.

.SS Literal patterns

.nf
match value {
0 => zero(),
1 => one(),
_ => many(),
}
.fi

.SS Binding patterns

.nf
match option {
Option.Some(value) => process(value),
Option.None => ignore(),
}
.fi

.SS Tuple patterns

.nf
let (name, value) = entry;
.fi

.SS Form patterns

.nf
let Position { x, y } = position;
.fi

.SS Alternative patterns

.nf
match token {
Token.LeftParen | Token.LeftBracket => open_group(),
_ => continue_parse(),
}
.fi

.SS Guarded patterns

.nf
match value {
number when number > 100 => large(number),
number => normal(number),
}
.fi

.SH STANDARD ENTRY POINT
A native executable commonly defines:

.nf
proc main() -> int {
give 0;
}
.fi

An entry point accepting process arguments may use the standard runtime signature defined by the active runtime profile.

.nf
proc main(arguments: [string]) -> int {
for argument in arguments {
print(argument);
}

give 0;

}
.fi

Embedded profiles may define target-specific entry points.

.nf
proc setup() {
}

proc loop() {
}
.fi

.SH COMPLETE EXAMPLE

.nf
space example.application;

use core.collections.{HashMap, Vector};
use core.option.Option;
use core.result.Result;
use core.string.String;

share all;

pick Severity {
Note,
Warning,
Error,
}

form Diagnostic {
code: string,
message: string,
severity: Severity,
}

form Context {
diagnostics: [Diagnostic],
symbols: HashMap<string, int>,
}

proc context_new() -> Context {
give Context {
diagnostics: [],
symbols: HashMap.new(),
};
}

proc diagnostic_new(
code: string,
message: string,
severity: Severity,
) -> Diagnostic {
give Diagnostic {
code: code,
message: message,
severity: severity,
};
}

proc context_add_diagnostic(
context: Context,
diagnostic: Diagnostic,
) -> Context {
give Context {
diagnostics: context.diagnostics + [diagnostic],
symbols: context.symbols,
};
}

proc verify_source(
context: Context,
source: string,
) -> Result<Context, Diagnostic> {
if len(source) == 0 {
let diagnostic: Diagnostic = diagnostic_new(
“E0001”,
“source file is empty”,
Severity.Error,
);

    give Result.Error(diagnostic);
}
let updated: Context = context_add_diagnostic(
    context,
    diagnostic_new(
        "N0001",
        "source accepted",
        Severity.Note,
    ),
);
give Result.Ok(updated);

}

proc main() -> int {
let context: Context = context_new();
let result: Result<Context, Diagnostic> = verify_source(
context,
“proc main() -> int { give 0; }”,
);

match result {
    Result.Ok(final_context) => {
        print(len(final_context.diagnostics));
        give 0;
    },
    Result.Error(diagnostic) => {
        print(diagnostic.code);
        print(diagnostic.message);
        give 1;
    },
}

}
.fi

.SH GRAMMAR SUMMARY
The following summary is informative and does not replace the canonical Vitte EBNF grammar.

.nf
program          ::= module_decl? import_decl* item* EOF ;

module_decl      ::= “space” path “;” ;
import_decl      ::= “use” import_path “;” ;
visibility       ::= “share” | empty ;

item             ::= procedure_decl
| form_decl
| pick_decl
| trait_decl
| impl_decl
| type_alias
| const_decl
| static_decl
| extern_block ;

procedure_decl   ::= visibility? attributes?
“proc” identifier generic_params?
“(” parameters? “)”
return_type? where_clause?
block ;

form_decl        ::= visibility? attributes?
“form” identifier generic_params?
“{” form_fields? “}” ;

pick_decl        ::= visibility? attributes?
“pick” identifier generic_params?
“{” pick_variants? “}” ;

trait_decl       ::= visibility? attributes?
“trait” identifier generic_params?
“{” trait_items* “}” ;

impl_decl        ::= attributes?
“impl” generic_params?
type (“for” type)?
where_clause?
“{” impl_items* “}” ;

type_alias       ::= visibility?
“type” identifier generic_params?
“=” type “;” ;

const_decl       ::= visibility?
“const” identifier “:” type
“=” expression “;” ;

static_decl      ::= visibility?
“static” identifier “:” type
“=” expression “;” ;

statement        ::= let_statement
| set_statement
| expression_statement
| give_statement
| break_statement
| continue_statement
| defer_statement ;

let_statement    ::= “let” pattern type_annotation?
“=” expression “;” ;

set_statement    ::= “set” pattern type_annotation?
“=” expression “;” ;

give_statement   ::= “give” expression? “;” ;
break_statement  ::= “break” expression? “;” ;
continue_statement ::= “continue” “;” ;
defer_statement  ::= “defer” expression “;” ;

expression       ::= literal
| identifier
| array_expression
| tuple_expression
| block
| if_expression
| match_expression
| loop_expression
| while_expression
| for_expression
| call_expression
| field_expression
| index_expression
| unary_expression
| binary_expression
| assignment_expression ;

type             ::= primitive_type
| path_type
| generic_type
| array_type
| tuple_type
| reference_type
| pointer_type
| procedure_type ;

reference_type   ::= “ref” lifetime? type
| “mut” “ref” lifetime? type ;

array_type       ::= “[” type “]”
| “[” type “;” expression “]” ;

tuple_type       ::= “(” type (”,” type)* “)” ;
.fi

.SH FILE EXTENSION
The canonical Vitte source extension is:

.nf
.vit
.fi

Older documentation or development snapshots may refer to:

.nf
.vitte
.fi

New source files, examples, commands, documentation, tests, and packages should use
.BR .vit .
