.TH VITTEC 1 "May 2026" "vitte 0.1.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
vittec \- compatibility command for legacy Vitte workflows

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vittec
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIoptions\fR] \fI<input>\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vittec
is the compatibility frontend for the Vitte compiler toolchain.

It exists to preserve historical workflows, scripts, build systems,
continuous integration configurations, IDE integrations, shell aliases,
and automation originally written for older releases of the compiler.

Internally,
.B vittec
uses the same frontend, semantic analysis pipeline, type checker,
borrow checker, intermediate representations, runtime integration,
diagnostics engine, cache subsystem, and backend infrastructure as
.BR vitte (1).

No separate compiler implementation exists.

For all practical purposes:

.nf
vittec == vitte
.fi

except for command naming and compatibility behavior.

.SH COMPATIBILITY GUARANTEE

The Vitte project attempts to maintain long-term compatibility for
.B vittec
so that older projects continue to build without modification.

The compatibility layer covers:

.IP \(bu 2
historical command invocations

.IP \(bu 2
legacy automation scripts

.IP \(bu 2
older editor integrations

.IP \(bu 2
continuous integration systems

.IP \(bu 2
packaging environments

.IP \(bu 2
educational material

.IP \(bu 2
bootstrap compiler workflows

.SH ARCHITECTURE

The
.B vittec
command forwards execution to the modern compiler pipeline:

.nf
Source
  |
Lexer
  |
Parser
  |
AST
  |
Resolver
  |
Semantic Analysis
  |
Type Checker
  |
Borrow Checker
  |
HIR
  |
MIR
  |
IR
  |
Backend
  |
Linker
  |
Executable
.fi

All compiler passes are identical to those used by
.BR vitte (1).

.SH COMMANDS

Every command supported by

.BR vitte (1)

is also supported by

.BR vittec .

This includes:

.TP
.B help
Display help information.

.TP
.B parse
Run lexical and syntactic analysis.

.TP
.B check
Perform semantic validation.

.TP
.B build
Compile source code.

.TP
.B run
Compile and execute.

.TP
.B fmt
Format source code.

.TP
.B lint
Run lints and style checks.

.TP
.B test
Execute tests.

.TP
.B bench
Run benchmarks.

.TP
.B package
Create distributable artifacts.

.TP
.B doc
Generate documentation.

.TP
.B mod
Module management commands.

.TP
.B explain
Explain diagnostic codes.

.TP
.B doctor
Validate toolchain configuration.

.SH OPTIONS

All options accepted by

.BR vitte (1)

are accepted by

.BR vittec .

Notable examples include:

.TP
.B --dump-tokens
Print lexer output.

.TP
.B --dump-ast
Print AST.

.TP
.B --dump-hir
Print HIR.

.TP
.B --dump-mir
Print MIR.

.TP
.B --dump-ir
Print compiler IR.

.TP
.B --emit-c
Generate C output.

.TP
.B --emit-llvm
Generate LLVM IR.

.TP
.B --emit-object
Generate object files.

.TP
.B --emit-asm
Generate assembly.

.TP
.B --target <target>
Select compilation target.

.TP
.B --incremental
Enable incremental compilation.

.TP
.B --cache-dir <path>
Specify cache location.

.TP
.B --repro
Enable reproducible builds.

.SH TARGETS

Supported targets include:

.TP
.B native
Host platform.

.TP
.B linux-x86_64
Linux x86_64.

.TP
.B linux-aarch64
Linux ARM64.

.TP
.B windows-x86_64
Windows x86_64.

.TP
.B macos-aarch64
Apple Silicon.

.TP
.B riscv64
RISC-V.

.TP
.B arduino-uno
Arduino Uno.

.TP
.B arduino-mega
Arduino Mega.

.TP
.B arduino-nano
Arduino Nano.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B VITTE_HOME
Compiler installation directory.

.TP
.B VITTE_CACHE_DIR
Compiler cache location.

.TP
.B VITTE_RUNTIME_PATH
Runtime search path.

.TP
.B VITTE_TARGET_PATH
Target definitions.

.TP
.B VITTE_LANG
Diagnostics language.

.TP
.B VITTE_COLOR
Color configuration.

.SH FILES

.TP
.B src/vitte/compiler
Compiler implementation.

.TP
.B src/vitte/runtime
Runtime libraries.

.TP
.B src/vitte/stdlib
Standard library.

.TP
.B tests
Test suite.

.TP
.B docs
Documentation.

.TP
.B man/vitte.1
Primary compiler manual.

.TP
.B man/vittec.1
Compatibility manual.

.SH EXIT STATUS

.TP
.B 0
Success.

.TP
.B 1
General error.

.TP
.B 2
Compilation failure.

.TP
.B 64
Command usage error.

.TP
.B 65
Input error.

.TP
.B 70
Internal compiler error.

.SH EXAMPLES

Compile:

.nf
vittec build hello.vit
.fi

Run:

.nf
vittec run hello.vit
.fi

Generate LLVM IR:

.nf
vittec build hello.vit --emit-llvm
.fi

Generate assembly:

.nf
vittec build hello.vit --emit-asm
.fi

Check only:

.nf
vittec check hello.vit
.fi

Diagnostics JSON:

.nf
vittec check hello.vit --diag-json
.fi

Arduino:

.nf
vittec build blink.vit \\
  --target arduino-uno \\
  --upload
.fi

.SH MIGRATION

New projects should prefer:

.BR vitte (1)

instead of

.BR vittec .

Existing projects may continue using

.B vittec

without modification.

.SH BUGS

Issues should be reported through the Vitte issue tracker together
with compiler version, target platform, command line, and a minimal
reproducer.

.SH AUTHORS

The Vitte compiler is developed by the Vitte contributors.

.SH COPYRIGHT

Copyright \(co 2026 The Vitte Project.

.SH SEE ALSO

.BR vitte (1),
.BR vittefmt (1),
.BR vittepkg (1),
.BR vitte-lsp (1),
.BR vitte-doc (1),
.BR vitte-build (1),
.BR vitte-check (1)
