.TH MODULES 4 "Post 4.0" " "
.SH NAME
Modules, Config \- post directory software configuration
.SH DESCRIPTION
A modules argument describes a particular directory
(database) or network address.
The
.B \-m
option of
.IR post (1)
and
.IR pq (1)
and the arguments to
.IR server (1M)
must describe a directory,
and the
.I pq_open
call of
.IR pq (3C)
can describe either a directory or a network address.
The syntax for modules arguments is described below.
The
.I dirmod
and
.I netmod
arguments below are modules arguments themselves;
in this way various modules can be stacked in a pipeline fashion.
The default modules argument is
.BR "opt join" .
.SS "Directory Modules"
.TP 5
.BR "tee " "file [dirmod...]"
Attach to the directory specified by
.I dirmod
and save the session in
.I file
in
.IR server (1M)
format.
.TP
.BR "opt " [dirmod...]
Attach to the directory specified by
.I dirmod
and pass directory queries in optimized form.
.TP
.BR "join " [file]
Attach to one or more directories listed in
.I file.
Relative paths are prefixed with $POST.
The default is
.B lib/dispatch
and the format is described in
.IR dispatch (4).
.TP
.BR "virt " [dirmod...]
Attach to the directory specified by
.I dirmod
and translate the virtual attributes
.BR pn ,
.BR name ,
and
.BR tel
into their constituent attributes (see
.IR post (1)).
.TP
\f3ev\f1 [\f3\-s\f1 sep] [\f3\-d\f1 data] [\f3\-p\f1 proto] [index]
Attach to an
.IR ev (4)
directory:
.I sep
is the field separator (default vertical bar
.RB ( | )),
.I index
is the directory containing the index files (default current directory),
.I data
contains the database records (default
.IB index /Data\f1),
and
.I proto
describes the fields in the data file (default
.IB index /Proto\f1).
Relative paths are prefixed with $POST.
.TP
.BR "call " [netmod...]
Connect to the network address specified by
.I netmod
and use the
.IR server (1M)
protocol.
.SS "Network Modules"
.TP 5
.BR "tap " "infile outfile [netmod...]"
Connect to the network address specified by
.I netmod
and save the input from the network in
.I infile
and the output to the network in
.I outfile.
.TP
.BR "sys " file
Connect to
.I file
(typically a device)
opened for reading and writing.
.TP
.BR "cmd " "program [args...]"
Connect to the standard input and output of
.I program
run via
.IR execvp (2).
.TP
.BR "dk " dialstring
Connect to the
.IR dk (1)
(Datakit) destination
.I dialstring
(typically
.IR area/exch/line.service ).
.TP
.BR "rx " "host service"
Connect to the
.IR rexec (1)
destination
.I host
and request
.IR service .
.TP
.BR "tcp " "host service"
Connect via the
.IR socket (3)
interface to the TCP/IP
.I host
and request
.IR service .
.TP
.BR "tcpti " "host service"
Connect via the transport interface to the TCP/IP
.I host
and request
.IR service .
.TP
.BR "ti " "netspec address [service]"
Connect to
.I address
on the transport provider
.I netspec
and optionally request
.IR service .
.P
.I Modules
lists the directory and network modules and options
for compiling the directory query system of
.IR post (1).
Each line consists of a module name followed by the
.IR cc (1)
options needed for compilation of that module.
The object file
.IB module .o
is loaded implicitly, and the special module name
.B +
is used to set global compilation options.
Blank lines and comments introduced by sharp
.RB ( # )
are ignored.
.P
.I Config
reads the
.I Modules
file and creates various files necessary for compilation.
The file
.B config.lib
contains the
.IR cc (1)
options needed to load with programs that use
.IR pq (3C),
and the file
.B networks
lists the network modules that were configured.
Modules are not included if their header files or libraries are not found.
.P
If the environment variable
.B POST
is not set, it defaults to
.B /usr/add-on/post
if it exists, or the home directory of the
.B post
login.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 30
$POST/src/pq/Modules
modules file
.TP
$POST/src/pq/Config
configuration program
.TP
$POST/src/pq/config.lib
libraries needed for compilation
.TP
$POST/lib/networks
configured network modules
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
post(1),
server(1M),
pq(3C).
