.TH PQ 3C "Post 4.0" " "
.SH NAME
pq \- post directory query and network interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B char \(**pq_open (argv)
.B char \(**\(**argv;
.P
.B int pq_close (pq)
.B char \(**pq;
.P
.B int pq_read (pq, vec)
.B char \(**pq, \(**\(**vec;
.P
.B int pq_write (pq, vec)
.B char \(**pq, \(**\(**vec;
.P
.B int pq_read (pq, buf, size)
.B char \(**pq, \(**buf;
.B int size;
.P
.B int pq_write (pq, buf, size)
.B char \(**pq, \(**buf;
.B int size;
.P
.B extern char \(**pq_error;
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I pq
is a set of routines that provides access to a directory
(database) or a network.
.P
.I pq_open
arranges for a directory or network to be accessed.
.I argv
identifies the particular directory or network
and is described in
.IR modules (4).
The return value is a handle to the opened object
and is used in subsequent operations on that object.
.P
.I pq_close
ends access to the directory or network referenced by the handle
.IR pq .
All resources used by the handle are released.
.P
.I pq_read
and
.I pq_write
access the object referenced by the handle
.I pq
and have different calling sequences for directory and network handles.
Directory handles pass an array of strings
.I vec
and network handles pass a character buffer
.I buf
and its size in bytes
.IR size .
.P
.IR pq_write ,
where
.I pq
is a directory handle, arranges to query the directory for the attributes
and values listed in the array of strings
.IR vec ,
which is terminated by a null pointer.
Each string is either
.IR attribute=value ,
which selects records whose
.I attribute
matches
.IR value ;
or
.IR attribute ,
which projects records with
.I attribute
from the directory.
Selects with different attributes are anded;
selects with like attributes are ored.
If
.I vec
consists of exactly one string
.BR attribute ,
the query projects the names of the attributes in the directory.
The attribute names are directory specific,
and the matching algorithms are directory and attribute specific (see
.IR modules (4)).
.P
.IR pq_read ,
where
.I pq
is a directory handle, returns an array of strings in
.I vec
for the next record that matches the query requested by the last
.I pq_write
call.
The strings are returned in the same order as the query.
Attributes that are repeated in the query have their values
repeated in the return vector, which is terminated by a null pointer.
.P
Where
.I pq
is a network handle,
.I pq_read
reads at most
.I size
bytes from the network connection into the buffer
.IR buf ,
and
.I pq_write
writes
.I size
bytes from the buffer
.I buf
to the network connection.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All functions return -1 on failure, except for
.IR pq_open ,
which returns a null pointer.
An error message is placed in
.I pq_error
for all failures, except for functions that
take a network handle argument, which set
.I errno
instead.
.P
.I pq_read
returns a positive integer if a record is
retrieved for a directory handle,
or the number of bytes read from the connection for a network handle.
It returns 0 if no more records match in a directory,
or if the network connection is closed remotely.
.P
.I pq_write
returns a positive integer if the query is accepted by the directory,
or the number of bytes written to the network connection.
.SH SEE ALSO
post(1),
modules(4).
