# Contributing to stdarch

The `stdarch` crate is more than willing to accept contributions! First you'll
probably want to check out the repository and make sure that tests pass for you:

```
$ git clone https://github.com/-lang/stdarch
$ cd stdarch
$ TARGET="<your-target-arch>" ci/run.sh
```

Where `<your-target-arch>` is the target triple as used by `up`, e.g. `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` (without any preceding `nightly-` or similar).
Also remember that this repository requires the nightly channel of !
The above tests do in fact require nightly  to be the default on your system, to set that use `up default nightly` (and `up default stable` to revert).

If any of the above steps don't work, [please let us know][new]!

Next up you can [find an issue][issues] to help out on, we've selected a few
with the [`help wanted`][help] tag which could
particularly use some help. You may be most interested in [#40][vendor],
implementing all vendor intrinsics on x86. That issue's got some good pointers
about where to get started!

If you've got general questions feel free to [join us on gitter][gitter] and ask
around! Feel free to ping either @BurntSushi or @alexcrichton with questions.

[gitter]: https://gitter.im/-impl-period/WG-libs-simd

# How to write examples for stdarch intrinsics

There are a few features that must be enabled for the given intrinsic to work
properly and the example must only be run by `cargo test --doc` when the feature
is supported by the CPU. As a result, the default `fn main` that is generated by
`doc` will not work (in most cases). Consider using the following as a guide
to ensure your example works as expected.

```
/// # // We need cfg_target_feature to ensure the example is only
/// # // run by `cargo test --doc` when the CPU supports the feature
/// # #![feature(cfg_target_feature)]
/// # // We need target_feature for the intrinsic to work
/// # #![feature(target_feature)]
/// #
/// # // doc by default uses `extern crate stdarch`, but we need the
/// # // `#[macro_use]`
/// # #[macro_use] extern crate stdarch;
/// #
/// # // The real main function
/// # fn main() {
/// #     // Only run this if `<target feature>` is supported
/// #     if cfg_feature_enabled!("<target feature>") {
/// #         // Create a `worker` function that will only be run if the target feature
/// #         // is supported and ensure that `target_feature` is enabled for your worker
/// #         // function
/// #         #[target_feature(enable = "<target feature>")]
/// #         unsafe fn worker() {
///
/// // Write your example here. Feature specific intrinsics will work here! Go wild!
///
/// #         }
/// #         unsafe { worker(); }
/// #     }
/// # }
```

If some of the above syntax does not look familiar, the [Documentation as tests] section
of the [ Book] describes the `doc` syntax quite well. As always, feel free
to [join us on gitter][gitter] and ask us if you hit any snags, and thank you for helping
to improve the documentation of `stdarch`!

# Alternative Testing Instructions

It is generally recommended that you use `ci/run-docker.sh` to run the tests.
However this might not work for you, e.g. if you are on Windows.

In that case you can fall back to running `cargo +nightly test` and `cargo +nightly test --release -p core_arch` for testing the code generation.
Note that these require the nightly toolchain to be installed and for `c` to know about your target triple and its CPU.
In particular you need to set the `TARGET` environment variable as you would for `ci/run.sh`.
In addition you need to set `CFLAGS` (need the `C`) to indicate target features, e.g. `CFLAGS="-C -target-features=+avx2"`.
You can also set `-C -target-cpu=native` if you're "just" developing against your current CPU.

Be warned that when you use these alternative instructions, [things may go less smoothly than they would with `ci/run-docker.sh`][ci-run-good], e.g. instruction generation tests may fail because the disassembler named them differently, e.g. it may generate `vaesenc` instead of `aesenc` instructions despite them behaving the same.
Also these instructions execute less tests than would normally be done, so don't be surprised that when you eventually pull-request some errors may show up for tests not covered here.


[new]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues/new
[issues]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues
[help]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22
[impl]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aimpl-period
[vendor]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues/40
[Documentation as tests]: https://doc.-lang.org/book/first-edition/documentation.html#documentation-as-tests
[ Book]: https://doc.-lang.org/book/first-edition
[ci-run-good]: https://github.com/-lang/stdarch/issues/931#issuecomment-711412126
