.TH VITTE 1 "May 2026" "vitte 2.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vitte \- main CLI for the Vitte compiler and tools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vitte
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIoptions\fR] \fI<input>\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vitte
is the primary command-line interface for the Vitte compiler and its associated tools. It orchestrates the entire compilation pipeline, which includes several distinct stages:

The process begins with reading the source code, which is then passed to the lexer to tokenize the input stream. Tokens are fed into the parser to build a structured Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). The AST undergoes semantic analysis to form the High-level Intermediate Representation (HIR), which captures program semantics more explicitly. The compiler then lowers the HIR to the Mid-level Intermediate Representation (MIR), optimizing and preparing it for code generation. The backend takes the MIR and generates target-specific code, such as assembly or object files, which are then linked to produce the final executable or library.

This structured pipeline ensures modularity, ease of debugging, and extensibility, enabling Vitte to support multiple targets and advanced features efficiently.
.SH ARCHITECTURE
The Vitte compiler architecture is composed of several well-defined components:

.IP \bu 2
The \fBfrontend\fR handles lexical analysis, parsing, and AST construction, providing a robust syntactic foundation.

.IP \bu 2
The \fBsemantic analysis\fR phase includes name resolution, module import verification, and symbol table construction.

.IP \bu 2
\fBType checking\fR verifies type correctness, enforcing canonical type names and strict module imports.

.IP \bu 2
\fBBorrow checking\fR ensures safe memory access and enforces ownership semantics, preventing data races and invalid references.

.IP \bu 2
The \fBMIR\fR (Mid-level Intermediate Representation) is a simplified, SSA-based representation used for optimizations and transformations.

.IP \bu 2
\fBIR\fR (Intermediate Representation) serves as a common format for backend code generation and analysis.

.IP \bu 2
The \fBbackend\fR generates target-specific code, supporting multiple output formats including native executables, LLVM IR, and C code.

.IP \bu 2
The \fBlinker\fR combines compiled objects and libraries into final binaries.

.IP \bu 2
\fBDiagnostics\fR provide detailed error and warning messages, supporting multiple languages and output formats.

.IP \bu 2
\fBIncremental compilation\fR improves build times by reusing cached intermediate results and artifacts.

.SH PROJECT LAYOUT
The standard Vitte repository layout is organized around compiler, runtime, standard library, tooling, tests, and documentation.

.TP
.B src/vitte/compiler
Compiler frontend, semantic analysis, MIR, backend, linker, and diagnostics.
.TP
.B src/vitte/runtime
Runtime support libraries and platform abstractions.
.TP
.B src/vitte/stdlib
Official standard library modules.
.TP
.B tools
Build, generation, bootstrap, formatting, and maintenance utilities.
.TP
.B tests
Compiler, runtime, integration, regression, and snapshot tests.
.TP
.B docs
Language reference, standard library reference, tutorials, and guides.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Display detailed help information and common usage patterns for Vitte commands.
.TP
.B init [dir]
Initialize a new Vitte project in the specified directory, setting up the necessary configuration and directory structure.
.TP
.B explain <code>
Provide detailed explanations of diagnostic codes, such as \fBE0001\fR or \fBW1001\fR, including causes and suggested fixes.
.TP
.B doctor
Perform a comprehensive check of the toolchain and host environment to ensure compatibility and correct setup.
.TP
.B parse
Run the lexer and parser stages only, producing an AST without further analysis or code generation.
.TP
.B check
Perform parsing, name resolution, semantic analysis, and type checking without generating backend output.
.TP
.B emit
Generate compiler artifacts for inspection, such as intermediate representations or target code.
.TP
.B build
Execute the full compilation pipeline, producing final executables or libraries for the specified target.
.TP
.B profile
Run a build with detailed timing and profiling information to analyze performance bottlenecks.
.TP
.B reduce
Automatically minimize a failing input source to a small, reproducible test case that triggers the issue.
.TP
.B clean-cache
Remove all cached compiler state and intermediate files to force a full rebuild.
.TP
.B mod graph
Display the module dependency graph and detect cycles or import issues.
.TP
.B mod doctor
Verify module imports, aliases, and detect naming collisions or inconsistencies.
.TP
.B mod contract-diff
Compare exported module contracts between two different inputs to identify API changes.
.TP
.B run
Compile and execute the specified Vitte program, optionally passing arguments to the runtime.
.TP
.B fmt
Format source code files according to the Vitte style guidelines.
.TP
.B lint
Analyze source code for stylistic and semantic issues without compiling.
.TP
.B test
Run unit tests and integration tests defined in the project.
.TP
.B bench
Execute benchmarks to measure performance characteristics of the code.
.TP
.B package
Create distributable packages or archives for the Vitte project.
.TP
.B install
Install compiled binaries or libraries into system or user directories.
.TP
.B uninstall
Remove previously installed binaries or libraries.
.TP
.B version
Display version information for the Vitte compiler and tools.
.TP
.B env
Show environment variables and configuration settings affecting the compiler.
.TP
.B cache stats
Display statistics about the compiler's cache usage and contents.
.TP
.B cache clear
Clear cache entries selectively or entirely to free disk space or reset state.
.TP
.B doc
Generate documentation from source code comments and metadata.
.TP
.B doc serve
Start a local server to browse generated documentation interactively.
.TP
.B doc build
Build static documentation sites for publishing.
.TP
.B mod list
List all modules available in the current project and dependencies.
.TP
.B mod search
Search for modules in configured repositories or registries.
.TP
.B mod tree
Show hierarchical module dependencies as a tree structure.
.TP
.B mod verify
Check module integrity, signatures, and compatibility.
.TP
.B target list
List all supported compilation targets with their descriptions.
.TP
.B runtime list
List available runtime profiles and their configurations.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B Diagnostics
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " <code>"
Set the diagnostics language, e.g., \fBen\fR for English or \fBfr\fR for French.
.TP
.BI \-\-explain " <code>"
Explain a specific diagnostic code in detail.
.TP
.B \-\-diag-json
Output diagnostics in JSON format for machine processing.
.TP
.B \-\-diag-code-only
Print compact, code-only diagnostics for concise output.
.TP
.B \-\-color
Enable colored output for diagnostics and logs.
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable colored output.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Increase verbosity of compiler messages.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress non-error messages.
.TP
.B \-\-trace
Enable detailed tracing for debugging compiler internals.
.TP
.B \-\-time
Print timing information for compilation stages.
.TP
.B \-\-profile-json
Output profiling data in JSON format.
.TP
.B Frontend
.TP
.B \-\-dump-tokens
Print tokens generated by the lexer.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-ast
Print the Abstract Syntax Tree after parsing.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-symbols
Print symbol tables after semantic analysis.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-cfg
Print control flow graphs for functions.
.TP
.B Analysis
.TP
.B \-\-dump-hir
Print the High-level Intermediate Representation.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-mir
Print the Mid-level Intermediate Representation.
.TP
.B \-\-dump-borrowck
Print borrow checker results and diagnostics.
.TP
.B \-\-strict-types
Enforce strict canonical type names.
.TP
.B \-\-strict-modules
Require explicit module imports.
.TP
.B \-\-strict-imports
Require explicit imports and reject unused aliases.
.TP
.B \-\-fail-on-warning
Treat warnings as errors.
.TP
.B Backend
.TP
.B \-\-emit-vitte
Emit a Vitte-specific artifact only.
.TP
.B \-\-emit-c
Emit C source code.
.TP
.B \-\-emit-ir
Emit intermediate representation code.
.TP
.B \-\-emit-llvm
Emit LLVM IR code.
.TP
.B \-\-emit-object
Emit object files.
.TP
.B \-\-emit-asm
Emit assembly code.
.TP
.B \-\-stage " <name>"
Stop compilation after the specified stage: \fBparse\fR, \fBresolve\fR, \fBir\fR, \fBbackend\fR, etc.
.TP
.B \-\-threads " <n>"
Set the number of threads to use for parallel compilation.
.TP
.B \-\-jobs " <n>"
Alias for \-\-threads.
.TP
.B Runtime
.TP
.BI \-\-runtime-include " <path>"
Add a directory to the runtime include path.
.TP
.BI \-\-runtime-profile " <name>"
Select the runtime profile: \fBcore\fR, \fBsystem\fR, \fBdesktop\fR, or \fBarduino\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-upload
Upload compiled code to Arduino devices after build.
.TP
.BI \-\-port " <path>"
Specify the serial port for Arduino communication.
.TP
.BI \-\-fqbn " <name>"
Specify the fully qualified board name for Arduino targets.
.TP
.B Reproducibility
.TP
.B \-\-repro
Enable reproducible builds with stable output ordering.
.TP
.B \-\-repro-strict
Enforce strict determinism in lowering and code generation.
.TP
.B \-\-incremental
Enable incremental compilation to speed up rebuilds.
.TP
.BI \-\-incremental-dir " <path>"
Specify a directory for incremental compilation cache.
.TP
.B Debugging
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Include debug symbols and extra metadata.
.TP
.B Optimization
.TP
.B \-O0 .. \-O3
Set optimization level, from no optimization (\-O0) to aggressive optimizations (\-O3).
.TP
.B Cache
.TP
.BI \-\-cache-dir " <path>"
Set the directory used for compiler cache storage.
.SH STAGES
The compilation pipeline in Vitte consists of the following stages:

.TP
.B lexer
Tokenizes raw source code into a stream of tokens.
.TP
.B parser
Converts tokens into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
.TP
.B ast
Represents parsed source code structures.
.TP
.B resolve
Performs name resolution and module import checks.
.TP
.B sema
Conducts semantic analysis, including symbol table construction.
.TP
.B typeck
Checks type correctness and enforces type rules.
.TP
.B borrowck
Performs borrow checking to ensure safe memory access.
.TP
.B hir
Generates High-level Intermediate Representation.
.TP
.B mir
Generates Mid-level Intermediate Representation for optimization.
.TP
.B ir
Intermediate representation used for backend processing.
.TP
.B backend
Generates target-specific code such as assembly or object files.
.TP
.B linker
Links compiled objects into final executables or libraries.
.SH TARGETS
Vitte supports multiple compilation targets, including:

.TP
.B vitte
The default native target for the host platform.
.TP
.B native
Alias for the host platform’s native target.
.TP
.B linux-x86_64
Linux on x86_64 architecture.
.TP
.B linux-aarch64
Linux on ARM 64-bit architecture.
.TP
.B windows-x86_64
Windows on x86_64 architecture.
.TP
.B macos-aarch64
macOS on ARM 64-bit architecture (Apple Silicon).
.TP
.B riscv64
RISC-V 64-bit architecture.
.TP
.B arduino-uno
Arduino Uno microcontroller board.
.TP
.B arduino-mega
Arduino Mega microcontroller board.
.TP
.B arduino-nano
Arduino Nano microcontroller board.

.SH TARGET FAMILIES
.TP
.B native
Host compilation using the current platform toolchain.
.TP
.B cross
Cross compilation using target-specific runtimes and linkers.
.TP
.B embedded
Microcontroller and constrained-device targets.
.TP
.B experimental
Research and prototype backends under active development.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Environment variables influencing Vitte behavior:

.TP
.B VITTE_HOME
Base directory for Vitte installation and resources.
.TP
.B VITTE_CACHE_DIR
Directory for compiler cache storage.
.TP
.B VITTE_RUNTIME_PATH
Paths to runtime libraries and includes.
.TP
.B VITTE_TARGET_PATH
Paths to target-specific files and configurations.
.TP
.B VITTE_COLOR
Enable or disable colored output (values: \fBon\fR, \fBoff\fR).
.TP
.B VITTE_LANG
Set the diagnostics language.

.SH CONFIGURATION FILES
.TP
.B vitte.toml
Primary project configuration file.
.TP
.B vitte.lock
Dependency and reproducibility lock file.
.TP
.B .vitte-cache
Compiler cache metadata.
.TP
.B .vitte-target
Target-specific build metadata.

.SH DIAGNOSTIC CODES
Diagnostics are categorized by severity and subsystem.

.TP
.B E####
Compiler errors that prevent successful compilation.
.TP
.B W####
Warnings that indicate suspicious but valid code.
.TP
.B N####
Informational notes attached to diagnostics.
.TP
.B H####
Hints suggesting potential fixes.

.SH INCREMENTAL COMPILATION
Incremental compilation stores intermediate compiler artifacts and analysis results in a cache directory. Subsequent compilations reuse unchanged work where possible, reducing build latency and improving developer iteration speed.

.SH REPRODUCIBLE BUILDS
When reproducible mode is enabled, Vitte attempts to generate byte-for-byte identical outputs from identical inputs. This mode minimizes timestamp, path, and host-dependent variations.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The Vitte command returns the following exit codes:

.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
General error, such as invalid command line options or internal failure.
.TP
.B 2
Compilation error, including syntax or semantic errors.
.TP
.B 64
Usage error, such as missing required arguments.
.TP
.B 65
Data format error, e.g., corrupted input files.
.TP
.B 70
Internal software error or unexpected condition.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B vitte parse source.vitte
Tokenize and parse the source file, printing the AST.
.TP
.B vitte check src/
Perform full semantic checks on all source files in the src directory.
.TP
.B vitte build --target linux-x86_64 -O2 main.vitte
Build an optimized executable for Linux x86_64.
.TP
.B vitte run main.vitte -- arg1 arg2
Compile and run the program, passing \fIarg1\fR and \fIarg2\fR as runtime arguments.
.TP
.B vitte emit --emit-llvm main.vitte
Generate LLVM IR code for inspection.
.TP
.B vitte emit --emit-c main.vitte
Generate equivalent C source code.
.TP
.B vitte build --target arduino-uno --upload blink.vitte
Build and upload a program to an Arduino Uno board.
.TP
.B vitte check --diag-json src/ > diagnostics.json
Run checks and output diagnostics in JSON format.
.TP
.B vitte build --repro -O3 src/
Perform a reproducible build with maximum optimizations.
.TP
.B vitte mod graph
Show the module dependency graph to analyze project structure.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs and feature requests at the official Vitte GitHub repository: https://github.com/vincent/vitte/issues. Include detailed reproduction steps, compiler version, and platform information.
.SH AUTHORS
The Vitte project is developed and maintained by a community of contributors. For a full list of authors and contributors, please refer to the AUTHORS file in the source repository.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vittec (1),
.BR vittefmt (1),
.BR vittepkg (1),
.BR vitte-lsp (1)
,.BR vitte-doc (1)
,.BR vitte-check (1)
,.BR vitte-build (1)
