.TH DMDMAN 1 "630 MTG"
.SH NAME
dmdman \- print manual pages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "dmdman"
[options] [sections] titles
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I dmdman
utility
prints the on-line manual pages for the given titles.
\f3Titles\f1 are entered in lower case. The \f3sections\f1 are
numbers from one to eight and correspond to the manual page
section numbers. The \f3section\f1
number may not have a letter suffix. If no \f3section\f1 is
specified, the whole manual is searched for \f3title\f1 and
all occurences of it are printed.
.sp
\f3Options\f1 and their meanings are:
.PP
.TP 6
\fB-c\fR
Preprocess output with col(1).
.PP
.TP 6
\fB-d\fR
Search the current directory rather than \f2$DMD/man\f1.
.PP
.TP 6
\fB-w\fR
Prints on the standard output only the \f3pathname\f1 of the
entries, relative to \f2$DMD/man\f1, or the current directory
for \f2-d\f1 option.
.PP
.TP 6
\fB-Tterm\fR
Set \f2TERM\f1 (refer greek(1)) before printing the manual
page. In addition, a null \f3term\f1 will clear the
\f3term\f1 variable for the duration of the \f2dmdman\f1
invocation.
.PP
.TP 6
\fB-12\fR
Indicates that the terminal type specified on the \f2-T\f1
option or in the \f2$Term\f1 variable is to be placed in 12 pitch
mode. If this option is used, then the terminal type must not
include the ``-12'' string; otherwise, this string will occur
twice in the \f2$Term\f1 variable, thus making it invalid.
.PP
Since the manual pages are not available on the
AT&T 3B2 Computer, this command will not work on that computer.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 32
$DMD/man/?_man/man[1-8]/*
Packed manual entries
.DT
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
col(1), greek(1) in the
\fIUNIX System V User's Reference Manual\fR.
