.ds ZZ DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE
.TH JX 1 "630 MTG"
.SH NAME
jx \- 630 MTG execution and stdio interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jx
[\fB \-d \fR] [\fB \-p \fR] [\fB \-z \fR] [ \fB\-f\fR ] [ \fB\-Z\fR n ] [ \fB\-n\fR ] file
.br
[ command line arguments]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I jx
utility
downloads the program in
.I file
to the 630 MTG
and runs it there, simulating most of the standard I/O library
functions.
This gives application programs downloaded into the 630 MTG the ability
to perform operations such as file I/O to files resident on the host
computer, using the same interface as programs
written for execution on the host computer.
.PP
The jx utility calls 
.I dmdld 
to do the download into the terminal. Therefore, the 
\f2-d\f1, \f2-p\f1, \f2-z\f1, \f2-f\f1, \f2-Z\f1, and \f2-n\f1 
options are available for use with \f2jx\f1. See the 
.I dmdld(1) 
manual page for information on these options.
.PP
\fIStdin\fR directed to the host portion of \f2jx\f1, either through the \f2jx\f1
command line or with the \fIpopen\fR function, is properly redirected.
Note that input from the 630 MTG keyboard is not translated to \fIstdin\fR
to the host portion of \f2jx\f1. Rather, programs wishing to read from the
keyboard should use \fIkbdchar\fR(3R).
.PP
.I Stdout
and \fIstderr\fR, written to by the below library functions,
will be stored in a buffer during execution.
After the terminal program has
been rebooted,
.I stdout
and
.I stdin
will be redirected to the terminal.
.PP
Programs intended for use by
.I jx
should include \f3<dmd.h>\f1 and <\f3dmdio.h\f1>
and call \fIexit\fR(3R) upon termination.  \fIExit\fR() returns control to
the shell and causes a reboot of
the default terminal emulator.
.PP
What follows is a list of
stdio library functions available under \fIjx\fR.
These functions are called
from an application downloaded into the 630 MTG
by \f2jx\f1. The \f2jx\f1 library routines in the terminal then
translate the call into a message which is sent to the host portion
of \f2jx\f1 for processing.
.sp
.TS
center;
l l l l.
getc	getchar	fgets	fflush
.sp
putc	putchar	puts	fputs
.sp
fopen	freopen	fclose	access
.sp
popen	pclose	fread	fwrite
.sp
printf	Printf	fprintf	Fprintf
.TE
.sp
The functions fprintf and printf are stripped down versions of
those on UNIX. The functions that start with an upper case
letter are identical to those on UNIX. See printf(3L) for more
details.
.bp
.SH FILES
.nf
$DMD/include/dmdio.h

$DMD/lib/sysint		host portion of \f2jx\f1 after download is complete

$HOME/.jxout			saved standard output

$HOME/.jxerr			saved standard diagnostic output
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
dmdld(1), exit(3R), kbdchar(3R), printf(3L).
.br
access(2),
fopen(3S),
fread(3S),
getc(3S),
popen(3S),
printf(3S),
putc(3S),
puts(3S) in the
\f2UNIX System V Programmer's Reference Manual\f1.
.SH WARNING
.P
Because 630 MTG keyboard data is not sent to the \f2stdin\f1 of the
host component of \f2jx\f1, applications running under \f2jx\f1 which read
from the \f2stdin\f1 will hang if their \f2stdin\f1 is not redirected.
.P
The \f2stdin\f1 can be redirected either from the command line or by
function calls inside the application process running on the
630 MTG terminal.
.SH BUGS
.I Jx
does not work when su'ed to another user.
.P
.I Jx
does not work in the nonlayers environment.
.P
\fIJx\fR does not work with application cached with
\fBA_SHARED\fR, \fBA_BSS\fR or \fBA_DATA\fR.
.P
\fIStderr\fR is buffered. Use fflush (stderr) if this is a
problem.
.P
\fIgetc(), getchar(), putc()\fR, and \fIputchar()\fR are not
macros as described in \fIgetc(3S)\fR and \fIputc(3S)\fR.
.P
The \fIfopen()\fR routine does not support the following
modes: r+, w+, a+.
