.TH UCACHE 1 "630 MTG"
.SH NAME
ucache \- List and remove objects in the Application cache
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ucache
.SH DESCRIPTION
After being downloaded, the program
.I ucache
will cache itself as a global command and exits.
The user can access the command through the \fBMore\fR
submenu under the item \fIucache\fR displayed with a garbage
can icon. An arrow from the item directs the user to a 
submenu that lists sequentially all objects (commands and
applications) that are currently in the terminal's Application
cache.
.PP
The names listed in the \fIucache\fR submenu are the
\fImenu names\fR of the objects. Menu names are names that
cached applications use to advertise themselves in the
\fBMore\fR menu. They may be different from \fItag names\fR
which uniquely identify an object in the Application cache.
(For further discussion, see \fIcache(3L)\fR.) If an
object in the Application cache does not have a menu name,
its tag name is displayed instead.
.PP
Items in the \fIucache\fR submenu may be greyed. Greyed
items mean they cannot be selected for removal because:
.IP "\f3\(em\f1"
they have been cached with the \fBA_PERMANENT\fR bit set
(see \fIcache(3L)\fR). In this case, the item names are
displayed with a lock icon, and they can never be uncached
by \fIucache\fR.
.ce
\f3or\f1
.IP "\f3\(em\f1"
they have been requested (used) by some running process.
If all processes using the object exit or are deleted, then the
item's name corresponding to the object will be un-greyed.
.PP
Items that are not greyed can be selected for removal. All caching 
information concerning the object will be erased and the memory freed.
Note that \fIucache\fR can remove itself from the Application cache.


.SH SEE ALSO
cache(3L), cmdcache(3L), decache(3L).
