.TH INS 8
.SH NAME
ins \- install software
.SH USAGE
.B ins
[
.I option ...
]
[
[
.I source
]
.I target
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ins
queues a request to `install' the named 
.I target 
file \- in the simplest case, by copying from
.I source 
to
.BR target " \-
and then attempts to execute all pending requests
for the target,
until thwarted by lack of privilege.
By default, each target has a separate queue, but if several files are
to be updated together their requests can
also be placed in another separate queue.
If modification requests for a given target file appear in several
different queues, those requests will be executed in correct time 
order.
A request will be served only when it is at the front of all the queues
it is in.
.PP
If no target is named,
.I ins
attempts to serve all pending requests.
The options are
.TP
.B -x
Verify consistency of currently queued-up requests
with historical record in
.F /usr/spool/ins/log.
.TP
.B -v
Print a verbose commentary
(by copying logging data to standard output).
.TP
.B -n
Print, but do not execute, the modification requests.
.TP
.BI -j " jobnumber"  "...
Delete a queued-up request.
Possible values for
.I jobnumber
are revealed by using the
.B -n
flag, where they are listed in the style
.BI /usr/spool/ins/job jobnumber.
.TP
.BI -q " queuename
Put the request in special named queue, in addition to the
queue for
.I target.
.TP
.B -r
Remove target.
.TP
.BI -o " owner
Set uid of target.
.TP
.BI -g " group
Set gid of target.
.TP
.BI -m " mode
Set file mode of target, as in 
.IR chmod (1).
.TP
.BI -l " label
Set file label of target, as in
.IR setlab (1).
.TP
.BI -p " cap lic
Set file privileges, as in
.IR setpriv (8).
.PP
.I Ins
records
.IR xs (8)-style
checksums of both modified software and of its own queues,
keeps a verbose log file, etc, etc.
.SH FILES
.F /usr/spool/ins/log
.br
.F /usr/spool/ins/lock
.br
.F /usr/spool/ins/pending
.br
.F /usr/spool/ins/job*
.br
.F /usr/spool/ins/dat*
.SH BUGS
Not written yet.
