.TH MOUNT 8
.CT 1 sa_nonmortals
.SH NAME
mount, umount \- mount and dismount file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/mount
[ options ]
[
.I special name
[
.I fstype
[
.I flags
] ] ]
.PP
.B /etc/mount
.B -a
.PP
.B /etc/mount
[
.I special name
[
.B -r
]
]
.PP
.B /etc/umount
.I name
.PP
.B /etc/umount
.B -a
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mount
announces to the system that a removable file system
of type
.I fstype
is present on the file
.I special.
The file
.I name
must exist already; it
must be a directory (unless the root of the
mounted file system is not a directory).
It becomes the name of the newly mounted root.
See
.IR fmount (2)
for a list of file system types
and appropriate flags.
If
.I fstype
or
.I flags
is omitted,
zero is assumed;
file system type 0
is an ordinary disk file system.
.PP
The options are
.TP
.B -a
Mount all the files designated in 
.FR /etc/fstab ;
see 
.IR fstab (5).
No other arguments are legal with 
.BR -a .
.TP
.B -r
Read only; shorthand for
.I fstype
0
and
.I flag
1.
A deprecated usage allows
.B -r
to follow
.I name.
.TP
.BI -l " label
The 
.I label,
given in the form of 
.I atolab
(see
.IR labtoa (3)),
becomes the file system ceiling described in
.IR fmount (2).
.PP
.I Umount
announces to the system that the file system mounted on file 
.I name
is to be removed.
.PP
If the
.B -a
option is present for 
.I mount
.RI ( umount ),
an attempt is made to mount (remove) each file system named in
.FR /etc/fstab
(\c
.FR /etc/mtab ).
.PP
These commands
maintain a table of mounted devices in
.FR /etc/mtab .
If invoked without an argument,
.I mount
prints the table.
.PP
Physically write-protected and magnetic tape file
systems must be mounted read-only
or errors will occur when access times are updated,
whether or not any explicit write is attempted.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B "/etc/mount /dev/ra02 /usr"
Mount the file system on disk
.L /dev/ra02
on directory
.LR /usr .
.TP
.B "/etc/mount /dev/null /proc 2"	
Mount the process file system.
.TP
.B " /etc/mount -l 'nu u ffff...' /dev/ra02 /usr
File capabilities on
.IR exec (2)
are limited to
.BR T_NOCHK
and
.BR T_UAREA ,
with self-licensing only for
.BR T_UAREA ;
all lattice labels are accessible (ceiling is lattice top).
.SH FILES
.TF /etc/fstab
.TP
.F /etc/mtab
mount table
.TP
.F /etc/fstab
file system table
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR fmount (2),
.IR fstab (5), 
.IR netfs (8)
.SH BUGS
Mounting file systems full of garbage will crash the system.
.br
Mounting a root directory on a non-directory
makes some apparently good pathnames invalid.
