.TH PWSERV 8
.CT 1 sa_auto
.SH NAME
pwserv \- password verification service 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/pwserv
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pwserv,
normally started from
.IR rc (8),
handles password verification requests initiated by (say)
.IR pwquery (3)
through the conventional 
process mount point
.FR /cs/pw .
When a request is made a file descriptor (called the `line' below)
is passed to 
.I pwserv
together with a user name and an optional parameter string.
Normally,
.I pwserv
writes a prompt on the line, reads a reply, and returns
an indication of success to the invoking client.
Valid passwords are taken from the file
.FR /etc/pwfile ,
which lists for each user an ordinary (encrypted,
.IR crypt (3)-style)
password and an
SNK (Secure Net Key) challenge-response key.
Before prompting, an
.B FIOPX
IO control is attempted to render the line to the end user private;
see
.IR pex (4).
If this succeeds 
either a classical or an Atalla password is accepted.
If the pex bid fails, the prompt warns that the line
is not private, and only an SNK response is accepted.
.PP
In the pexed case the prompt looks like
.B Password(pjw:31416):
and in the unpexed case like
.B "Password(TAPPED LINE:01492):
The five digit string after the colon is the Atalla challenge string.
Only the first five digits of the Atalla response string are significant.
Hex digits in the response must be typed in lower case.
.PP
Possible values of the optional parameter string are
.TP
.B pex
(specified by opening  the server with
.B ipcopen("/cs/pw!pex") )
Accept passwords only if the
.B FIOPX
succeeds.
.PP
When the line's stream identifier asserts previous confirmation
of the same password,
.I pwserv
answers affirmatively without demanding a password; see
.IR session (1)
and
.IR src (5).
.SH FILES
.nf
.F /etc/pwserv
.F /etc/pwfile
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR pwquery (3),
.IR ipc (3),
.IR pex (4),
.IR stream (4),
.IR pwfile (5),
.IR passwd (1)
.SH BUGS
Jammable.
