.TH SYSLOG 8
.CT 1 sa_nonmortals
.SH NAME
syslog, logpr \- system security logging
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B priv syslog
.I command
[
.I arg2
[
.I arg3
]
]
.PP
.B /etc/logpr
.I file
[
.I offset
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Syslog
controls the mandatory logging scheme.
License
.B T_LOG
is required.
The variety of different commands and command formats
reflects the full complexity of the
protean
.IR syslog (2)
system call.
In the usages given below a
.I mask
argument is a combination of letters
.BR NILESDATUPX ,
meaning:
.TP
.PD0
.B N
Record all uses of file names.
.TP
.B S
Record all seek calls.
.TP
.B U
Record all writes to the `u area'.
.TP
.B I
Record all accesses of inode contents.
.TP
.B D
Record possession and use of file descriptors.
.TP
.B P
Record process history:
.IR exec (2),
.IR fork (2),
.IR kill (2),
.IR exit (2).
.TP
.B L
Record all explicit changes of labels by
.IR setflab 
(see
.IR getflab (2))
and
.IR setplab 
(see
.IR getplab (2)).
.TP
.B A
Record all changes of labels.
.TP
.B X
Record all uses of privilege.
.TP
.B E
Record all
.B ELAB
error returns.
.TP
.B T
Record all uses of a traced file or process.
.PD
.PP
Valid arguments to
.I syslog
are:
.TP
.BI "on " file " " logdev
Nominate
.I file
as repository for user generated
logging records written to logging special file
.IR logdev .
.I File
must be a full path name, and must be openable for writing.
If
.IR logdev 's
minor device number is zero,
.I file
will also receive mandatory (kernel generated) logging records.
.I Logdev
may be a full path name or a minor device number.
.PD0
.TP
.BI "off "  logdev
Cancel the effect of an
.B on
command.
.TP
.BI "get " n
Print the value of the
.IR n -th
log mask.
Values of
.I n
are 0, 1, 2, or 3
for the `poison' masks; 4 is `global' mask.
.TP
.BI "set " n " " mask
Set the value of the
.IR n -th
log mask.
.TP
.BI "fget " file
Print the poison level of
.IR file ,
one of the integers 0, 1, 2, or 3.
.I File
must be the full path name of a readable file.
.TP
.BI "fset " file " " n
Set the poison level of
.I file
to
.IR n .
.I File
must be the full path name of a readable file.
.TP
.BI "pget " pid
Print the logging mask of process
.IR pid .
.TP
.BI "pset " pid " " mask
Set the logging mask of process
.I pid
to
.IR mask .
.PD
.PP
.I Logpr
converts to cryptic
.SM ASCII
the cryptic binary format of a log file described in
.IR log (5).
The optional numerical byte offset tells where in the file printing
is to start.
.SH FILES
.TF /dev/log/log00
.TP
.F /dev/log/log00
where
.I syslog
makes voluntary entries
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR syslog (2),
.IR log (4),
.IR log (5).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
`Covert channel warning': the log file has
a label that is neither top nor flagged
.BR L_NO .
