.TH SYSLOG 2
.CT 2 file_inq_creat dirs secur
.SH NAME
syslog \- security logging
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/log.h>
.PP
.B int syslog(command, arg2, arg3)
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Syslog
controls security logging.
The
.I command
argument determines
the meaning of the other arguments.
.LP
Logging is done by writing on special files, described in
.IR log (4).
One of these files is the `system log file' where
the kernel records certain events automatically.
Each process has an `audit mask' that determines which events
cause logging records; mask items are 
defined in
.BR <sys/log.h> ;
see
.IR log (5).
Each file has a `poison class'
with value 0, 1, 2, or 3.
The kernel has a table of four corresponding `poison masks'
and a global audit mask.
When a system call mentions a file in a pathname,
the poison mask
corresponding to the file's poison level
is ORed into the process audit mask;
when a process executes a file, the global log mask is
ORed into the process audit mask.
.LP
The forms of the several
.I syslog 
commands follow.
Arguments shown as
.BR 0 
are ignored.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGON, " " fd ", "  x )
Turn logging on; nominate file descriptor
.I fd
as repository for log file with minor device number
.I x.
.I Fd
must be open
for writing.
Logging will persist after
.I fd
is closed.
.PD0
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGOFF, 0, "x" )
Turn logging off on minor device number
.I x.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGGET, " n ", 0)
Return the value of the
.IR n th
poison mask;
.IR n =4
designates the global audit mask.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGSET, " n ", " x )
Set the
.IR n th
poison mask to 
.I x.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGFGET, " fd ", 0)
Return the poison level of the file associated with file descriptor
.IR fd ,
which may be open for reading or writing.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGFSET, " fd ", " x )
Set the poison level of the file associated with file descriptor
.IR fd ,
(which may be open for reading or writing)
to
.I x.
The poison level is stored in field
.B di_label.lb_junk
of the file's inode; see
.IR inode (5).
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGPGET, " pid ", 0)
Return the audit mask of process
.I pid.
.TP
.BI "syslog(LOGPSET, " pid ", " x )
Set the audit mask of process
.I pid
to
.I x.
.PD
.PP
.I Syslog
works only in processes with capability
.BR T_LOG ;
see
.IR getplab (2).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR log (4),
.IR log (5),
.IR syslog (8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.L
EBADF, EFAULT, EINVAL, EIO
