.TH SESSION 1
.CT 1 sa_nonmortals secur
.SH NAME
session \- substitute labels temporarily
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /bin/session
[ 
.I option ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Session
runs a subshell with a temporary security label.
It
first calculates the intended label and ceiling of the subshell
from the argument list.
If process licenses, or label or ceiling above the current ceiling
are sought,
.I session
obtains authorization by demanding a password.
If the authorization is sufficient for the intended label
and ceiling,
the labels of the subshell and of the file associated with
file descriptor 0 are set accordingly.
Descriptor 0 is restored to its original label when the
subshell terminates.
.LP
The options are
.TP
.BI -l " label
Set the label to the given value, specified as in
.IR atolab (3).
If the value does not dominate the process label,
clear the environment.
.TP
.B -p gumnlp
Set the process licenses, one or more of the letters
.B umnlp 
as described in
.IR atolab (3).
Implies option
.BR -n .
.TP
.B -n 
Use
.IR nosh (8)
rather than
.IR sh(1)
as the subshell.
.TP
.B -x
Suppress the restoration of file descriptor labels.
.TP
.BI -f " file
Change the label of
.I file
(a full pathname) as well as file descriptor 0;
restore the label when done.
A special password for
.I file
will be demanded,
and the subshell labels will be set to a value listed
in the password file
.BR /etc/pwfile .
Implies option
.BR -n ;
precludes option
.BR -u .
.TP
.BI -u " user
A special password for
.I user
will be demanded,
and the subshell ceiling will be set to the value listed
for
.I user
in
.BR /etc/pwfile .
Precludes option
.BR -f .
.LP
The following arguments are meant for
.IR login (8):
.TP
.B -Q
Ask for bottom, untrusted values of process and ceiling labels.
Suppress error messages on standard error output.
.TP
.BI -c " file
Execute
.I file
as the subshell instead of
.IR sh (1)
or
.IR nosh (8).
All subsequent arguments are used to form the argument list of the subshell.
.LP
If a password is needed for authorization and neither the
.B -f
or
.B -u
options were given,
.I session
will ask for the password listed under the current login name,
as revealed by
.IR getlogname (2).
In the absence of option
.B -p 
all licenses are relinquished.
.PP
.I Session
requires a `trusted path' for password negotiations.
Thus privileged work cannot be initiated from an
untrusted computer or from a terminal into which
untrusted code has been downloaded.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B session -l ffff...
Enter a top-label interactive terminal subsession.
.LP
.EX
session -l 0
HOME=/usr/yourname
\&. $HOME/.profile
.EE
.ns
.IP
Enter a bottom-label subsession within a higher-label subsession.
Restore the environment.
.LP
.ne3
.EX
/bin/session -f /dev/ra00
lmask n /etc/fsck /dev/ra00
.EE
.ns
.IP
Enter a disk-repair session, using
.IR nosh(8).
.TP
.B "session -Qx -u ken -c /bin/sh -sh"
How 
.IR login (8)
sets up a session for a
.L tlogin
service request.
.TP
.B session -Qx -c /bin/sh -sh
How
.I login
sets up a remote session for
.IR con (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR sh (1),
.IR getflab (2),
.IR getplab (2),
.IR pwfile (5),
.IR login (8),
.IR nosh (8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
`Sorry', instead of asking for a password: untrusted path.
