.TH PWQUERY 3X
.CT 2 sa secur
.SH NAME
pwquery, pexpw \(mi password services
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B pwquery(fd, name, param)
.B char *name;
.B char *param;
.PP
.B char *pexpw(fd, prompt)
.B char *prompt;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pwquery
calls upon the password server,
.IR pwserv (8)
to cause a password to be demanded from file descriptor
.I fd
and checked against the password for the named user.
It is loaded by option
.BR -lipc
of
.IR ld (1).
.PP
Echoing is disabled during the transaction,
and the server is persnickety about when to use an
Atalla challenge/response dialogue and when to use 
.IR crypt (3)-style
passwords.
A negative return value indicates a protocol error in
reaching the server or that the server is not trusted.
A zero return value indicates rejection of the password.
A positive return value indicates approval of the password.
.PP
The argument
.I param
may be zero (for vanilla password service)
or may point to a blank-separated list of one or more keywords.
Currently only one keyword is understood:
.TP
.B pex
Reject the password if the stream is unpexable.
.PP
.I Pexpw
reads a password from the indicated
file descriptor,
after prompting with the null-terminated string
.I prompt
and disabling echoing.
A pointer is returned to a null-terminated string
of at most 8 characters.
The dialogue is not attempted if it cannot be protected
from eavesdropping by the process-exclusive
mechanism of
.IR pex (4).
.SH FILES
.nf
.F /cs/pw
.F /etc/pwserv
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR ipc (3),
.IR getpass (3),
.IR pex (4)
.IR pwserv (8)
.SH BUGS
.I Pexpw
returns a pointer to static memory that is overwritten
at every call.

